first draft documentation on model sources (#5)
eclipse-sprotty/sprotty-website: hugo/content/docs/model_sources.md

---
title: 'Model Sources'
weight: 400
---

> When drawing a diagram with Sprotty we need a place to define and update the schema of the diagram to draw. For that Sprotty uses so-called model sources. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When drawing a diagram with Sprotty we need a place to define and update the schema of the diagram to draw. Sprotty uses *model sources* to do this. 
```

Sprotty currently offers two different model sources: The `LocalModelSource` for local models and the `DiagramServer` for remote ones.

> {{< mermaid class="text-center">}}

Reviewer: Adding a one to 2 sentence explanation would be good for this graph. Like:
> Whether you have a local or remote model source, sprotty still handles them in a similar fashion. In particular, actions are propagated from and to the model source and the action dispatcher. This is a powerful feature of Sprotty, as it allows the model to simultaneously send & to actions.

flowchart TD;
ActionDispatcher
ModelSource
LocalModelSource
DiagramServerProxy
DiagramServer
ActionDispatcher <-.->|Action| ModelSource
ModelSource --- LocalModelSource
ModelSource --- DiagramServerProxy
DiagramServerProxy <-.->|Action| DiagramServer
{{< /mermaid>}}

The following sections will explain how to use and work with them.

> ## general usage

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## General Usage
```

> regardless of the model source we are using, the first thing we have to do is always register it in the frontend DI-container like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regardless of the model source we are using, the first thing we have to do is to register our model source in the front-end DI-container like this:
```

```Typescript
bind(TYPES.ModelSource).to(ModelSourceClassOrProxy).inSingletonScope();
```

> After that, we can retrieve it with the following code to further configure and use it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that, we can retrieve the model source with the following code to further configure and use it.
```

```Typescript
const modelSource = container.get<LocalModelSource>(TYPES.ModelSource);
```

## Local Model Source

> The `LocalModelSource` allows to set and modify the model through function calls and keeps the model schema saved locally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `LocalModelSource` instance allows us to set and modify the model through function calls, and keeps the model schema saved locally.
```

To see how to use this model source, let's have a look at the following example:
```Typescript
import {SNode} from 'sprotty-protocol';
export default runExample() {
    const container = createContainer('sprotty-showcase');
    const modelSource = container.get<LocalModelSource>(TYPES.ModelSource);
    modelSource.setModel({
        type: 'graph'
        children: [
            <SNode>{
            type: 'node',
                id: 'main_node',
                text: 'node1',
                position: {x: 0, y: 0}
            }
        ]
    });

    document.getElementById('addButton').onClick(() => {
        modelSource.addElements([{parentId: 'graph', {
            type: 'node',
            id: 'new_node',
            text: 'new node',
            position: {x: 100, y: 100}
            }}])
    })
}
```

> In this example, we have a hard-coded data structure containing all our initial elements which are set as the model. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we have a hard-coded data structure containing all the initial elements which are set in the model. 
```

Be aware that by defining the model this way we are defining the model schema and not the actual model. Because of that, we should use the types for our nodes, edges, etc. from `sprotty-protocol` and not the `sprotty` main package.

After defining the model schema we can then use methods like `addElements()` from the `LocalDataSource` to add new nodes at the click of a button. The `LocalDataSource` then handles updating the model and notifying the `ActionDispatcher` about the update so that the view can receive an animated update.

Through methods like this, the `LocalModelSource` can also be used as a facade over the action-based API of Sprotty. It handles actions for bounds calculation and model updates.

## Diagram Server
When having the source based on which we want to generate the Diagram remotely, like in a worker or on a remote server, we can use Sprotty's DiagramServer. It communicates with the client through so-called `Action` objects which can be serialized to plain JSON.

> On client-side, instead of registering an actual `ModelSource` we use a `DiagramServerProxy`. The Proxy handles the communication and forwards actions to the `ActionDipatcher`. Out of the box, Sprotty offers the `WebSocketDiagramServerProxy` for communicating through WebSockets with the `DiagramServer`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the client-side, instead of registering an actual `ModelSource` we can use a `DiagramServerProxy`. The Proxy handles the communication and forwards actions to the `ActionDipatcher`. Out of the box, Sprotty offers the `WebSocketDiagramServerProxy` for communicating through WebSockets with the `DiagramServer`.
```

Should a different form of communication be necessary we would have to [create a custom proxy](#creating-a-custom-model-source-proxy).

> Using the `WebSocketDiagramServerProxy` is simple. we just need to call `listen` on the ModelSource and hand it the WebSocket we're communicating with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the `WebSocketDiagramServerProxy` is quite simple. we just need to call `listen` on the ModelSource and pass it the WebSocket we're communicating with.
```

```Typescript
const modelSource = container.get<WebSocketDiagramServerProxy>(TYPES.ModelSource);
modelSource.listen(websocket);
```

> For creating `DiagramServer` itself, let's look at an example. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For creating the `DiagramServer` itself, let's look at an example. 
```

```Typescript
// Creating a new websocket server
const wss = new WebSocketServer.Server({ port: 8080 });

// create our DiagramServices
const elkFactory: ElkFactory = () => new SocketElkServer();
const services: DiagramServices = {
    DiagramGenerator: new RandomGraphGenerator(),
    ModelLayoutEngine: new ElkLayoutEngine(elkFactory)
}
 
// Creating connection using websocket
wss.on("connection", ws => {

    const diagramServer = new DiagramServer(action => {
        ws.send(JSON.stringify(action));
    }, services)

    ws.on('message' data => {
        diagramServer.accept(data.action);
    });
});
```

> In this, we assume we have a simple [nodeJs WebSocket server](https://github.com/websockets/ws) and want to create a `DiagramServer` for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example above, we assume we have a simple [nodeJs WebSocket server](https://github.com/websockets/ws) and want to create a `DiagramServer` for it.
```

As we can see, there are two parts to creating the `DiagramServer`. 
First, we need a dispatch method to send actions from the server to the client. This can be as simple as calling `ws.send()` with the serialized action.

> Second, we need the `DiagramServices`. the `DiagramServices` type looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Second, we need the `DiagramServices`. The `DiagramServices` type looks like this:
```

```Typescript
export interface DiagramServices {
    readonly DiagramGenerator: IDiagramGenerator
    readonly ModelLayoutEngine?: IModelLayoutEngine
    readonly ServerActionHandlerRegistry?: ServerActionHandlerRegistry
}
```

> There are 3 components to the `DiagramServices`. One is mandatory, the other ones optional:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are 3 components to the `DiagramServices`. One is mandatory, the other two are optional:
```

> - The `DiagramGenerator` which the server uses to create the schema of the Diagram. 
> - Optionally the `ModelLayoutEngine`, like the `ElkLayoutEngine` from [sprotty-elk](https://github.com/eclipse-sprotty/sprotty/tree/master/packages/sprotty-elk), if we want to do server-side layouting.
> - Optionally the `ServerActionHandlerRegistry` for overwriting the default handling of incoming actions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The `DiagramGenerator` which the server uses to create the schema of the Diagram
- Optionally the `ModelLayoutEngine`, like the `ElkLayoutEngine` from [sprotty-elk](https://github.com/eclipse-sprotty/sprotty/tree/master/packages/sprotty-elk), if we want to do server-side layouting
- Optionally the `ServerActionHandlerRegistry` for overwriting the default handling of incoming actions
```

> ## Creating a custom model source proxy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Creating a Custom Model Source Proxy
```

> In case communication between the `DiagramServer` and client does not work through WebSockets, for example when the `DiagramServer` is running in a worker or the sprotty client is in a vscode webview (see [sprotty-vscode](https://github.com/eclipse-sprotty/sprotty-vscode)), we can easily implement our own proxy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In case communication between the `DiagramServer` and client does not work through WebSockets, for example when the `DiagramServer` is running in a worker or the sprotty client is in a vscode webview (see [sprotty-vscode](https://github.com/eclipse-sprotty/sprotty-vscode)), we can easily implement our own proxy instead.
```

```Typescript
export class WebWorkerDiagramProxy extends DiagramServerProxy {
    constructor(private worker: Worker) {
        super()
        const proxy = this;
        worker.onmessage = function(event) {
            proxy.messageReceived(event.data)
        }

    }

    protected sendMessage(message: ActionMessage): void {
        this.worker.postMessage(JSON.stringify(message));
    }
}
```

> First, we need to extend `DiagramServerProxy`. This already gives us most of our needed functionality and makes this proxy a `ModelSource`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Following the example above, first we need to extend `DiagramServerProxy`. This already gives us most of our needed functionality and makes this proxy a `ModelSource`.
```

> Then we need to listen for incoming messages and pass them to the `messageReceived()` function which deserializes them and passes them to the `ActionDispatcher`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we need to listen for incoming messages and pass them to the `messageReceived()` function, which deserializes them and passes them to the `ActionDispatcher`.
```

> Lastly, we only need to implement the `sendMessage()` method to allow actions coming from the `ActionDispatcher` to be transferred to the `DiagramServer`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lastly, we need to implement the `sendMessage()` method to allow actions coming from the `ActionDispatcher` to be transferred to the `DiagramServer`.
```

> 

Reviewer: Would be nice to add a concluding paragraph here, to wrap things up.
